So time to work on the favorites feature, let's start with the favorites
screen. On the favoritesScreen,
thus far I only say the favorites,
it's not bad but maybe we want to show some more meaningful text if we have no favorites, like you have
no favorites yet, start adding some
but of course we also want to allow the user to add some and then also output the favorites here. For
that,
the first question is how do we save or where do we save
which items, which meals the user marked as favorites?
We could add a new field in our dummy data and therefore in the meal model here where we have something
like a bool, isFavorite which can be edited.
We could do that but it's a bit unrealistic,
in reality we would probably fetch some data from a server and if we store the this is our favorite
data directly on the meal, then this would not be scoped to our user,
instead every user that fetches the data from the server would now have this as a favorite,
so storing this on the meal itself might not be perfect.
We could do it here of course for this dummy app but I'd rather use a different approach. In the main.dart
file here where we manage our filters,
I also want to manage a list of favorites,
that's the approach I prefer.
So there we have our list of meals which are the available meals,
I want to have a second list of meals which are our favorited meals. Now by default,
that's an empty list because at the beginning we have no favorite meals.
So by default, we have no favorite meals but now I can forward these favorite meals here to our favorites
screen. The problem with that of course is that the favoritesScreen is not part of our route registration
here but it's part of our TabsScreen, right? In the TabsScreen,
we get access to the favoritesScreen. So we can simply forward favorite meals to the TabsScreen and
in the TabsScreen here,
we now can accept this as an input. So here, we get our list of meals and the name here is favorite meals
and meal is the model which we have to import by going to the models folder and then pointing at the
meal.dart file
and of course we add the constructor here to save our favorite meals.
So now we have the favorite meals in the TabsScreen and there, we can forward them to the favorites
screen which we are creating here. So we can go to favoritesScreen and now forward
widget.favoriteMeals.
So now in the favoritesScreen, we can also accept that and again in the state management module, we'll learn
a different way of managing and passing our data around so that we don't have to go through multiple
layers of widgets and pass our data through constructors
but for the moment, it is what it is.
So here, we also have a list of meals in the favoritesScreen,
therefore we import our meal model from the models folder and I will name this favorite meals here as
well, of course you could pick a different name and favoritesScreen receives these favorite meals
as an input,
so as an argument here in the constructor. Now we can work with the favorite meals here,
however we'll have a problem in the TabsScreen, widget is not available here
when we initialize our properties.
You can use the widget property in the build method, you can use it in initState but you can't use
it here when you initialize these properties.
It's a problem that's easy to solve
however, since we're in a stateful widget and therefore in the state object here, we can simply add
initState here, the initState method and do our initialization of pages in there.
So cut that code here and create this in a non-final way
and then here initState, set pages equal to that list because here in initState, widget is available,
it will still run before build executes,
so we'll have no problem there with that screen not being loadable or anything like that.
So we will have everything set up when build runs but we avoid that issue of widget, of that property
not being available at the point of time we're initializing this class.
And in general by the way, when you're initializing a class in this property, you can't refer to any other
property,
so for example I couldn't set this equal to pages here either. You can't refer to other properties because
the creation of the class isn't fully finished and
that's also why we can't refer to the widget property.
So with that however by using initState, this should all work and now we can forward our favorite
meals from the main file to the TabsScreen and from the TabsScreen to the favoritesScreen.
Now in the main.dart file, we only need to add some logic to add or remove meals to and from the favorites.
That logic for adding and removing favorites should be managed in
the new method here in the main.dart file in our MyAppState class.
The method will not return anything and I'll name it toggleFavorite.
Now here, I expect to get the ID of the meal which is a string that should be turned into a favorite
or unfavorited
and with that information received, the goal now is to add it to this favorite meals list.
However of course only add it if it's not already part of that list because if it already is part of
that list, then I want to remove that meal because it's a toggle method that we should either add or remove.
We can do this with favorite meals and then index where. This checks whether a certain element is part
of that list and then automatically gives us the index of that meal if it is part,
if it's not part, the index will simply be -1.
So I'll store this in a final variable, existing index
and here as so often, you pass a function which receives the meal so which runs on every element on the
list your running index where on
and this should return true or false, so I will compare the meal ID with the meal ID I'm getting
and if I find a meal in favorite meals where this condition is met, then I know that then I will get
the index of that meal in the favorite meals list and I need that index to then remove it there
because if a meal with that ID is already part of favorite meals, then I want to remove it because
it's a toggle method.
If I don't find a meal, then existing index will be -1 and I know that I have to add that meal.
So now here, I'll check if existing index is greater or equal than 0 because of it's -1, then I
didn't find anything,
if it's greater or equal than zero, than I know that I did find a meal and therefore if it is greater, then
I want to remove a meal. So I will call set state here and in that function we pass to set state, I'll call
favorite meals and use removeAt, which takes the index of the element I want to remove and that's my
existing index. So this will now remove the element at that index from the favorite meals list
and since it's in initState, it will rebuild, therefore rebuild the material app with the routes table
and pass an updated favorite meals list to TabsScreen because that's all rebuilt. Now
else if I didn't find the element, then I will also use set state and I will then use favorite meals add
to add an element and there, I want to reach out to my dummy meals or to the available meals but I will
use dummy meals so that filtering doesn't play a role because you should also be able to toggle recipes
which are not matching your filters.
So here, I'll use dummy meals and then first where to find the first element, the first meal in our data
source, in our meal source which has the same ID with that good old function we pass there
where we get the meal and where I then simply return meal ID equals meal ID.
So that gives me the meal with the same ID in our data source, the first meal I find with that ID
is then added to favorite meals.
Now again, that of course means that whenever I toggle a meal as a favorite or turn it into a non-favorite,
then this build method is called and therefore the entire app is rebuilt.
Now this is of course not optimal as you can imagine because switching the favorite status of a meal
should not necessarily impact the entire app and therefore this is the number one topic we'll toggle
after this course section
once we dive into state management because for bigger apps, you definitely need a more elegant way. For
the moment,
this is fine but it is definitely something we'll improve later in the next course section.
So for the moment, it's fine that we rebuild everything though and we just need to make sure that toggle
favorite actually reaches the detail page of a meal because there, I want to be able to toggle the favorite
status. In the MealDetailScreen widget, instead of having that floating action button which deletes
this meal, which was just a demo for showing you how you can pop data and so on, instead of having this,
I want to use this floating action button to let the user favorite or unfavorite a meal.
So on this floating action button here, when this gets pressed,
I want to call this toggleFavorite function here in main.dart, this method.
Hence we should pass a reference to this method down to the MealDetailScreen
here in the constructor in our routes table and now in the MealDetailScreen there, I just need to
accept this, so I'll add a new property here, a function, toggleFavorite seems to be a fitting name,
of course you can pick any name you want
and now add the constructor and bind the data,
the argument we're getting to that property
and then we can use toggleFavorite down there on the floating action button
when this is pressed and simply use the reference to the function here without parentheses so that the
function gets executed when the user presses the button.
Now of course, we can also find a better icon and the icon should also reflect whether this currently
is a favorite or not
and for that I'll add another method in main because main has the information about which items are
favorites and which not. There
I'll add another function,
another method in the main.dart file in the MyAppState
class here, another method which will return a boolean and which I'll name isMealFavorite because it will
check if a meal is a favorite or not. It receives the ID of a meal and then here I want to return true
if that ID is part of my favorite meals list. So we can check if favorite meals
and now there is an any method which you can use on lists,
so you're learning a lot about list methods
here in this course too.
So there is an any method which you can use on any Dart list that also and so often takes a function which
it runs on every list element and here, I want to return meal.id equals ID and what I'm doing
here is I'm checking if the meal I'm looking at, because this function runs for every meal, has the ID
I'm checking, I'm checking if that meal with that ID here is a favorite.
So I'm running this function on every meal I have in favorite meals and any returns true if I find any
element in here where this is true and it will stop after the first element it found. So it will essentially
give me true
if I have a meal in favorite meals which has the ID I get here in isMealFavorite and I will pass
this method here, a reference a pointer at this method, to the MealDetailScreen as well, as a second
argument and in the MealDetailScreen, we therefore now can also store this in a property, final function
which I'll also name is favorite
maybe, I get this here as a second argument, is favorite
and now we can call is favourite to find out whether this meal we're currently looking at is a favorite or
not.
We can do that here in the floating action button to show a different icon based on whether it is a
favorite or not.
We can call is favorite and we just have to forward the ID of the meal we're looking at. Now
that ID is something we have because we're extracting it here into meal ID based on the data we're
getting when this route is loaded,
we're getting this with the modal route of context approach. So meal ID is a variable we create here
in build which has the ID of the meal we're looking at.
So I parse meal ID to is favorite and this will return true if the meal is a favorite and return
false
otherwise.
Now if it returns true and I'll use a ternary expression here, then the icon I want to render here
should use the star icon which is that filled star,
otherwise I want to use the star_border icon which is the empty star, so that when this is a favorite,
we see the filled star, if it's not a favorite yet we see these empty star and
when we tap this, this will of course change because then we'll add this meal to our favorites, thanks
to toggleFavorite which is linked to that method here in the main.dart file, to that toggleFavorite
method there. So that was a long story, with that we're not yet outputting our favorites on the favorites
screen though.
So on the favoritesScreen, to output that, we first of all need to check if we have favorites.
So here I'll check if favorite meals,
so if this property which is a list of favorites we're getting, if it is empty, we can do this with is
empty property which Flutter or which Dart gives us automatically on every list
and if it is empty, then I want to return this centered text here in the end.
Else, I'll return something else in my build method,
I'll return a list of meals. So then I want to return basically the same list I have here in the category
meals screen. There, we have that ListView builder function call,
I'll just copy that because that's exactly what I want to return here in the favorites
screen. Of course, meal item is a widget I need to import in order to use it here,
so I'll import from the widgets folder, meal_item.dart and now we have to pass in that data
and of course instead of displayedMeals, that is favorite meals. So here, I'll use favorite meals in all
these places down there, favorite meals index
in all these places and when we remove an item, that's not required anymore simply. We can get rid
of that,
I only had this in there temporarily to show you how to pass data back,
we don't need it anymore,
we can also get rid of that remove item thing here in the CategoryMealsScreen and of course now also
go to the meal item and not expect this anymore.
So there on the constructor, we shouldn't expect this remove item thing here anymore, so let's remove
that argument here and remove that final property
and of course, comment this out,
we don't need that anymore. With that, connection here crashed,
let me restart the app here and we should now have a setup where we hopefully are able to mark our meals
as favorites and see them in the favorites tab and then also of course switch them back to not being
a favorite
if you want to. So let's wait for this to finish and let's then see it in action.
So here I am and
if I go to favorites, I see you have no favorites yet
which makes sense. If I now go here to quick and easy,
then I get an error if I try to see the detail page and the problem I have is actually if you have
a look at the error message, that type string void is not a subtype of type empty to void.
So this means somewhere, we have a function where either we passed a string as an argument and it expected
no argument or it expected a string as an argument and we passed nothing, it has to be one of the two
things and we do, toggleFavorite. Here in meal detail,
I am pointing at toggleFavorite and this is coming from the main.dart file and there, toggleFavorite
indeed expects to get my ID
which is a string. So just pointing at it as I'm doing it here will not work,
instead we have to pass in a concrete value here. So we will wrap this in an anonymous function
and then here I want to forward my meal ID of course because we need that in order to set the ID,
to toggle this as a favorite. So with that, let's restart it
and now if we go to quick and easy, toast hawaii, now I can load this page and
now let me click that empty star,
it's empty because it's not a favorite yet and now it's filled out. And let me do it the same for maybe,
let's say here, for the delicious orange mousse,
also a favorite
now and let's go back now to the favorites tab
and there we see these two items
and now I can of course also go there and make this a non-favorite, the delicious orange mousse and
if I go back, still part of that screen though.
Now if I go to categories, I'm back to favorites,
now it's gone.
So why are items still a part of the favoritesScreen if I mark them as non-favorites
when I then go back?